PANA-EXP - Adding docs for the experimentation feature (#32587)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/product_analytics/experimentation/_index.md

---
title: Planning and Launching Experiments
description: Experimentation allows you to measure the causal relationship new experiences or features have on user outcomes.
further_reading:
- link: "/product_analytics/experimentation/reading_results.md"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Reading Experiment Results"

> - link: "/product_analytics/experimentation/defining_metrics"

Author: Added this for ease of flow as these build on one another. Let me know if there's a different way of approaching such a use case. Thanks so much!

  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Defining Experiment Metrics"
---

## Overview 
Datadog Experimentation allows you to measure the causal relationship that new experiences and features have on user outcomes. To do this, Experimentation randomly allocates traffic between two or more variations, and selects a subset of traffic to use as a control group.

This page walks you through planning and launching your experiments. 

## Setup
Follow the steps below to create, add metrics, and launch your experiment. 

### Step 1 - Create your experiment

1. Go to the [Experiments][1] page in Datadog Product Analytics
2. Click **Create Experiment**
3. Enter your experiment name and hypothesis

### Step 2 - Add metrics

After you’ve created an experiment, add your primary metric and optional guardrails. See [Defining Metrics][2] for details on how to create metrics.

> {{< img src="dd-logo.png" alt="A view of the User profiles page." style="width:10%;" >}}

Author: Sorry should have mentioned these are image placeholders.

#### Add a sample size calculation (optional)

After you’ve selected your experiment’s metrics, you can run an optimal sample size calculation to determine how large of a change in your chosen metric your experiment will be able to reliably detect, given your sample size. 

First, select the entry point of your experiment. This specifies _when_ in the user journey they will be enrolled into the test. 

For example, if you plan to run an experiment on users who visit the homepage, select the homepage view as your entry point. You can also update the number of variants and the traffic exposure (the percentage of traffic that hits the entry point that you want to include in the experiment).

Then, click **Run calculation** to see the [Minimum Detectable Effects][3](MDE) your experiment will have on your metrics. The MDE is the smallest difference that you are able to detect between your experiment’s variants. To learn more, see the [Minimum Detectable Effects][3] page.

> {{< img src="dd-logo.png" alt="A view of the User profiles page." style="width:10%;" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< img src="dd-logo.png" alt="A view of the User profiles page." style="width:10%;" >}}
```
this also doesn't seem to be the correct image ? :)

### Step 3 - Launch your experiment

> After specifying and aligning your the experiment, you can launch your test immediately or at a scheduled date. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After specifying and aligning your experiment, you can launch your test immediately or at a scheduled date. 
```

> First, you need to select a Feature Flag that captures the variants you want to test. If you have not yet created a feature flag, see the [Getting Started with Feature Flags][4] page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select a Feature Flag that captures the variants you want to test. If you have not yet created a feature flag, see the [Getting Started with Feature Flags][4] page.
```

Then, click **Set up experiment on feature flag** to specify how you want to roll out your experiment. You can either launch the experiment to all traffic, or schedule a gradual rollout with realtime RUM guardrails. 

{{< img src="dd-logo.png" alt="A view of the User profiles page." style="width:10%;" >}}

> You have now planned and launched your first experiment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Next steps
**Defining metrics**: Define the metrics you want to measure during your experimentation.
**Reading Experiment Results**: Review and explore your Experiment results.
Learn more about **Minimum Detectable Effects**: Choose an appropriately sized MDE.
```
This feels like it would benefit from a "Next Steps" section with links to those pages to highlight the sub pages, please re-word as you see fit !

## Setup
To create, configure, and launch your experiment, complete the following steps:

### Step 1 - Create your experiment

1. Navigate to the [Experiments][1] page in Datadog Product Analytics.
2. Click **+ Create Experiment**.
3. Enter your experiment name and hypothesis.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_create_experiment.png" alt="create an experiment and add a hypothesis for the experiment." style="width:80%;" >}}

### Step 2 - Add metrics

After you’ve created an experiment, add your primary metric and optional guardrails. See [Defining Metrics][2] for details on how to create metrics.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_decision_metrics1.png" alt="create an experiment and add a hypothesis for the experiment." style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Add a sample size calculation (optional)

After selecting your experiment’s metrics, use the optional sample size calculator to determine how small of a change your experiment can reliably detect with your current sample size.

1. Select the entry point of your experiment. This specifies _when_ in the user journey they will be enrolled into the test. 

> For example, if you plan to run an experiment on users who visit the homepage, select the homepage view as your entry point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, if you plan to run an experiment on users who visit the homepage, select the homepage view as your entry point.
```
Suggesting to indent this so it shows under step 1, double check the spacing :)

> For example, if you plan to run an experiment on users who visit the homepage, select the homepage view as your entry point. You can also configure the number of variants and the traffic exposure percentage (the portion of entry point traffic to include in the experiment).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you plan to run an experiment on users who visit the homepage, select the homepage view as your entry point.
```
(not available in initial preview release)

1. Click **Run calculation** to see the [Minimum Detectable Effects][3](MDE) your experiment has on your metrics. The MDE is the smallest difference that you are able to detect between your experiment’s variants.

{{< img src="/product_analytics/experiment/exp_sample_size.png" alt="Sleect an entrypoint event to run a sample size calculation" style="width:90%;" >}}

### Step 3 - Launch your experiment

> After specifying and aligning your experiment, you can launch your test immediately or at a scheduled date. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After specifying your metrics, you can now launch your experiment. 
```
scheduling was downscope for the initial release
